<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 74</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-74" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>GLOSSARY</h2>
			<p>A’, all.</p>
			<p>ABOON, abune, above.</p>
			<p>ABY, abye, endure, suffer.</p>
			<p>ACCOL<abbr class="era">AD</abbr>E, the salutation marking the bestowal of knighthood.</p>
			<p>AIN, own.</p>
			<p>ALANE, alone.</p>
			<p>AN, if.</p>
			<p>ANE, one.</p>
			<p>ARRAY, annoy, trouble.</p>
			<p>AULD, old.</p>
			<p>AWEEL, well.</p>
			<p>AYE, always.</p>
			<p>BAILIE, a city magistrate in Scotland.</p>
			<p>BAN, curse.</p>
			<p>BAWTY, sly, cunning.</p>
			<p>BAXTER, a baker.</p>
			<p>BEES, in the, stupefied, bewildered.</p>
			<p>BELIVE, belyve, by and by.</p>
			<p>BEN, in, inside.</p>
			<p>BENT, an open field.</p>
			<p>BHAIRD, a bard.</p>
			<p>BLACK-FISHING, fishing by torchlight poaching.</p>
			<p>BLINKED, glanced.</p>
			<p>BLUDE, braid, blood.</p>
			<p>BLYTHE, gay, glad.</p>
			<p>BODLE, a copper coin worth a third of an English penny.</p>
			<p>BOLE, a bowl.</p>
			<p>BOOT-KETCH, a bootjack.</p>
			<p>BRAE, the side of a hill.</p>
			<p>BRISSEL-COCK, a turkey cock.</p>
			<p>BREEKS, breeches.</p>
			<p>BROGUES, Highland shoes.</p>
			<p>BROKEN MEN, outlaws.</p>
			<p>BROUGHT FAR BEN, held in special favor</p>
			<p>BROWST, a brewing.</p>
			<p>BRUIK, enjoy.</p>
			<p>BUCKIE, a perverse or refractory person.</p>
			<p>BULLSEGG, a gelded bull.</p>
			<p>BURD, bird, a term of familiarity.</p>
			<p>BURN, a brook.</p>
			<p>BUSKING, dress, decoration.</p>
			<p>BUTTOCK-MAIL, a fine for fornication.</p>
			<p>BYDAND, awaiting.</p>
			<p>CAILLIACHS, old women on whom devolved the duty of lamenting for the dead, which the Irish call keening.</p>
			<p>CALLANT, a young lad, a fine fellow.</p>
			<p>CANNY, prudent, skillful, lucky.</p>
			<p>CANTER, a canting, whining beggar.</p>
			<p>CANTRIP, a trick.</p>
			<p>CARLE, a churl, an old man.</p>
			<p>CATERAN, a Highland irregular soldier, a freebooter.</p>
			<p>CHAP, a customer.</p>
			<p>CLACHAN, a hamlet.</p>
			<p>CLAW FAVOUR, curry favour.</p>
			<p>CLAYMORE, a broad sword.</p>
			<p>CLEEK, a hook.</p>
			<p>CLEIK the cunzie, steal the silver.</p>
			<p>COB, beat.</p>
			<p>COBLE, a small fishing boat.</p>
			<p>COGS, wooden vessels.</p>
			<p>COGUE, a round wooden vessel.</p>
			<p>CONCUSSED, violently shaken, disturbed, forced.</p>
			<p>CORONACH, a dirge.</p>
			<p>CORRIE, a mountain hollow.</p>
			<p>COVE, a cave.</p>
			<p>CRAME, a booth, a merchant’s shop.</p>
			<p>CREAGH, an incursion for plunder, termed on the Borders a raid.</p>
			<p>CROUSE, bold, courageous.</p>
			<p>CRUMMY, a cow with crooked horns.</p>
			<p>CUITTLE, tickle.</p>
			<p>CURRAGH, a Highland boat.</p>
			<p>DAFT, mad, foolish.</p>
			<p>DEBINDED, bound down.</p>
			<p>DECREET, an order of decree.</p>
			<p>DEOCH AN DORUIS, the stirrup-cup or parting drink.</p>
			<p>DERN, concealed, secret.</p>
			<p>DINMONTS, wethers in the second year.</p>
			<p>DOER, an agent, a manager.</p>
			<p>DOON, doun, down.</p>
			<p>DOVERING, dozing.</p>
			<p>DUINHE-WASSEL, dunniewassal, a Highland gentleman, usually the cadet of a family of rank.</p>
			<p>EANARUICH, the regalia presented by Rob Roy to the Laird of Tullibody.</p>
			<p>ENEUGH, eneuch, enough.</p>
			<p>ERGASTULO, in a penitentiary.</p>
			<p>EXEEMED, exempt.</p>
			<p>FACTORY, stewardship.</p>
			<p>FEAL AND DIVOT, turf and thatch.</p>
			<p>FECK, a quantity.</p>
			<p>FEIFTEEN, the Jacobite rebellion of 1715.</p>
			<p>FENDY, good at making a shift.</p>
			<p>FIRE-RAISING, setting an incendiary fire.</p>
			<p>FLEMIT, frightened,</p>
			<p>FRAE, from.</p>
			<p>FU, full.</p>
			<p>FULE, fool.</p>
			<p>GABERLUNZIE, a kind of professional beggar.</p>
			<p>GANE, gone.</p>
			<p>GANG, go.</p>
			<p>GAR, make.</p>
			<p>GATE, gait, way.</p>
			<p>GAUN, going.</p>
			<p>GAY, gey, very.</p>
			<p>GEAR, goods, property.</p>
			<p>GILLFLIRT, a flirty girl.</p>
			<p>GILLIE, a servant, an attendant.</p>
			<p>GILLIE-WET-FOOT, a barefooted Highland lad.</p>
			<p>GIMMER, a ewe from one to two years old.</p>
			<p>GLISKED, glimpsed.</p>
			<p>GRIPPLE, rapacious, niggardly.</p>
			<p>GULPIN, a simpleton.</p>
			<p>HA’, hall.</p>
			<p>HAG, a portion of copse marked off for cutting.</p>
			<p>HAIL, whole.</p>
			<p>HALLAN, a partition, a screen.</p>
			<p>HAME, home.</p>
			<p>HANTLE, a great deal.</p>
			<p>HARST, harvest.</p>
			<p>HERSHIPS, plunder.</p>
			<p>HILDING, a coward.</p>
			<p>HIRSTS, knolls.</p>
			<p>HORNING, charge of, a summons to pay a debt, on pain of being pronounced a rebel, to the sound of a horn.</p>
			<p>HOWE, a hollow.</p>
			<p>HOULERYING AND POULERYING, hustling and pulling.</p>
			<p>HURLEY-HOUSE, a brokendown manor house.</p>
			<p>ILK, same; of that ilk, of the same name or place.</p>
			<p>ILKA, each, every.</p>
			<p>IN THE BEES, stupefied.</p>
			<p>INTROMIT, meddle with.</p>
			<p>KEN, know.</p>
			<p>KITTLE, tickle, ticklish.</p>
			<p>KNOBBLER, a male deer in its second year.</p>
			<p>KYLOE, a small Highland cow.</p>
			<p>LAIRD, squire, lord of the manor.</p>
			<p>LANG-LEGGIT, long-legged.</p>
			<p>LAWING, a tavern reckoning.</p>
			<p>LEE LAND, pasture land.</p>
			<p>LIE, a word used in old Scottish legal documents to call attention to the following word or phrase.</p>
			<p>LIFT, capture, carry off by theft.</p>
			<p>LIMMER, a jade.</p>
			<p>LOCH, a lake.</p>
			<p>LOON, an idle fellow, a lout, a rogue.</p>
			<p>LUCKIE, an elderly woman.</p>
			<p>LUG, an ear, a handle.</p>
			<p>LUNZIE, the loins, the waist.</p>
			<p>MAE, mair, more.</p>
			<p>MAINS, the chief farm of an estate.</p>
			<p>MALT ABUNE THE MEAL, the drink above the food, half-seas over.</p>
			<p>MAUN, must.</p>
			<p>MEAL ARK, a meal chest.</p>
			<p>MERK, 13 ⅓ pence in English money.</p>
			<p>MICKLE, much, great.</p>
			<p>MISGUGGLED, mangled, rumpled.</p>
			<p>MONY, many.</p>
			<p>MORN, the morn, tomorrow.</p>
			<p>MORNING, a morning dram.</p>
			<p>MUCKLE, much, great.</p>
			<p>MUIR, moor.</p>
			<p>NA, nae, no, not.</p>
			<p>NAINSELL, own self.</p>
			<p>NICE, simple.</p>
			<p>NOLT, black cattle. ony, any.</p>
			<p>ORRA, odd, unemployed.</p>
			<p>ORRA-TIME, occasionally.</p>
			<p>OWER, over.</p>
			<p>PEEL-HOUSE, a fortified tower.</p>
			<p>PENDICLE, a small piece of ground.</p>
			<p>PINGLE, a fuss, trouble.</p>
			<p>PLENISHING, furnishings.</p>
			<p>PLOY, sport, entertainment.</p>
			<p>PRETTY MEN, stout, warlike fellows.</p>
			<p>REIFS, robberies.</p>
			<p>REIVERS, robbers.</p>
			<p>RIGGS, ridges, ploughed ground.</p>
			<p>ROKELAY, a short cloak.</p>
			<p>RUDAS, coarse, hag-like.</p>
			<p>SAIN, mark with the sign of the cross, bless.</p>
			<p>SAIR, sore, very.</p>
			<p>SAUMON, salmon.</p>
			<p>SAUT, salt.</p>
			<p>SAY, a sample.</p>
			<p>SCHELLUM, a rascal.</p>
			<p>SCOUPING, scowping, skipping, leaping, running.</p>
			<p>SEANNACHIE, a Highland antiquary.</p>
			<p>SHEARING, reaping, harvest.</p>
			<p>SHILPIT, weak, sickly.</p>
			<p>SHOON, shoes.</p>
			<p>SIC, siccan, such.</p>
			<p>SIDIER DHU, black soldiers, independent companies raised to keep peace in the Highlands; named from the tartans they wore.</p>
			<p>SIDIER ROY, red soldiers, King George’s men.</p>
			<p>SIKES, small brooks.</p>
			<p>SILLER, silver, money.</p>
			<p>SIMMER, summer.</p>
			<p>SLIVER, slice, slit.</p>
			<p>SMOKY, suspicious.</p>
			<p>SNECK, cut.</p>
			<p>SNOOD, a fillet worn by young women.</p>
			<p>SOPITE, quiet a brawl.</p>
			<p>SORNERS, sornars, sojourners, sturdy beggars, especially those unwelcome visitors who exact lodgings and victuals by force.</p>
			<p>SORTED, arranged, adjusted.</p>
			<p>SPEIR, ask, investigate.</p>
			<p>SPORRAN-MOLLACH, a Highland purse of goatskin.</p>
			<p>SPRACK, animated, lively.</p>
			<p>SPRING, a cheerful tune.</p>
			<p>SPURRZIE, spoil.</p>
			<p>STIEVE, stiff, firm.</p>
			<p>STIRK, a young steer or heifer.</p>
			<p>STOT, a bullock.</p>
			<p>STOUP, a jug, a pitcher.</p>
			<p>STOUTHREEF, robbery.</p>
			<p>STRAE, straw.</p>
			<p>STRATH, a valley through which a river runs.</p>
			<p>SYBOES, onions.</p>
			<p>TA, the. TAIGLIT, harassed, loitered.</p>
			<p>TAILZIE, taillie, a deed of entail.</p>
			<p>TAPPIT-HEN, a pewter pot that holds three English quarts.</p>
			<p>TAYOUT, tailliers-hors; in modern phrase, Tally-ho!</p>
			<p>TEIL, the devil.</p>
			<p>TEINDS, tithes.</p>
			<p>TELT, told.</p>
			<p>TILL, to. TOUN, a hamlet, a farm.</p>
			<p>TREWS, trousers.</p>
			<p>TROW, believe, suppose.</p>
			<p>TWA, two.</p>
			<p>TYKE, a dog, a snarling fellow.</p>
			<p>UNCO, strange, very.</p>
			<p>UNKENN’D, unknown.</p>
			<p>USQUEBAUGH, whiskey.</p>
			<p>WA’, wall.</p>
			<p>WARE, spend.</p>
			<p>WEEL, well.</p>
			<p>WHA, who.</p>
			<p>WHAR, where.</p>
			<p>WHAT FOR, why.</p>
			<p>WHILK, which.</p>
			<p>WISKE, whisk, brandish.</p>
			<p>A’, all.</p>
			<p>ABOON, abune, above.</p>
			<p>AE, one.</p>
			<p>AFF, off.</p>
			<p>AFORE, before.</p>
			<p>AHINT, behind.</p>
			<p>AIN, own.</p>
			<p>AITS, oats.</p>
			<p>AMAIST, almost.</p>
			<p>AMBRY, a cupboard, a pantry.</p>
			<p>AN, if.</p>
			<p>ANE, one.</p>
			<p>ANEUCH, enough.</p>
			<p>ARRAY, annoy, trouble.</p>
			<p>ASSOILZIED, absolved, acquitted.</p>
			<p>ASSYTHMENT, satisfaction,</p>
			<p>AULD, old.</p>
			<p>BAFF, a blow.</p>
			<p>BAGGANET, a bayonet.</p>
			<p>BAILIE, a city magistrate in Scotland.</p>
			<p>BAIRN, a child.</p>
			<p>BAITH, both.</p>
			<p>BANES, bones.</p>
			<p>BANG-UP, get up quickly, bounce.</p>
			<p>BARLEY, a parley, a truce.</p>
			<p>BAULD, bold.</p>
			<p>BAULDER, bolder.</p>
			<p>BAWBEE, a halfpenny.</p>
			<p>BAWTY, sly, cunning.</p>
			<p>BEES, in the, bewildered, stupefied.</p>
			<p>BEFLUMM’D, flattered, cajoled.</p>
			<p>BEGUNK, a trick, a cheat.</p>
			<p>BEN, within, inside.</p>
			<p>BENEMPT, named.</p>
			<p>BICKER, a wooden dish.</p>
			<p>BIDE, stay, endure.</p>
			<p>BIELDY, affording shelter.</p>
			<p>BIGGING, building.</p>
			<p>BIRLIEMAN, a peace officer.</p>
			<p>BLACKcock, the black grouse.</p>
			<p>BLACK-FISHING, ashing by torchlight, poaching.</p>
			<p>BLUDE, bluid, blood.</p>
			<p>BODDLE, bodle, a copper coin, worth one third of an English penny.</p>
			<p>BOGLE ABOUT THE BUSH, beat about the bush, a children’s game.</p>
			<p>BONNIE, beautiful, comely, fine,</p>
			<p>BOUNE, prepared.</p>
			<p>BRA’, fine, handsome, showy.</p>
			<p>BRANDER, broil.</p>
			<p>BREEKS, breeches.</p>
			<p>BRENT, smooth, unwrinkled.</p>
			<p>BROGUES, Highland shoes.</p>
			<p>BROO, brew, broth.</p>
			<p>BRUCKLE, brittle, infirm.</p>
			<p>BRUIK, enjoy.</p>
			<p>BRULZIE, bruilzie, a broil, a fray.</p>
			<p>BUCKIE, a perverse or refractory person.</p>
			<p>BUTTOCK-MAIL, a fine for fornication.</p>
			<p>BYDAND, awaiting.</p>
			<p>CA’, call.</p>
			<p>C<abbr class="era">AD</abbr>GER, a country carrier.</p>
			<p>CAILLIACHS, old women on whom devolved the duty of lamenting for the dead, which the Irish call keening.</p>
			<p>CALLANT, a stripling, a fine fellow.</p>
			<p>CANNILY, prudently.</p>
			<p>CANNY, cautious, lucky.</p>
			<p>CARLE, a churl, an old man.</p>
			<p>CATERAN, a freebooter.</p>
			<p>CHIEL, a young man.</p>
			<p>CLACHAN, a village, a hamlet.</p>
			<p>CLAMYHEWIT, a blow, a drubbing.</p>
			<p>CLASH, chatter, gossip.</p>
			<p>CLATTER, tattle, noisy talk.</p>
			<p>CLOSE, a narrow passage.</p>
			<p>CLOUR, a bump, a bruise.</p>
			<p>COCKY-LEEKY, a soup made of a cock, seasoned with leeks.</p>
			<p>COGHLING AND DROGHLING, wheezing and blowing.</p>
			<p>CORONACH, a dirge.</p>
			<p>CORRIE, a mountain hollow.</p>
			<p>COUP, fall.</p>
			<p>COW YER CRACKS, cut short your talk, hold your tongues.</p>
			<p>CRACK, boast.</p>
			<p>CRAIG, the neck, the throat.</p>
			<p>CRAMES, merchants’ shops, booths.</p>
			<p>CUT-LUGGED, crop-eared.</p>
			<p>DAFT, foolish, mad, crazy.</p>
			<p>DAUR, dare.</p>
			<p>DEAVING, deafening.</p>
			<p>DECREET, an order of decree.</p>
			<p>DELIVER, light, agile.</p>
			<p>DERN, hidden, concealed, secret.</p>
			<p>DING, knock, beat, surpass.</p>
			<p>DINGLE, dinnle, tingle, vibrate with sound.</p>
			<p>DOER, an agent, a manager.</p>
			<p>DOG-HE<abbr class="era">AD</abbr>, the hammer of a gun.</p>
			<p>DOILED, crazed, silly.</p>
			<p>DOITED, having the faculties impaired.</p>
			<p>DORLACH, a bundle.</p>
			<p>DOW, a dove.</p>
			<p>DOWF, dowff, dull, spiritless.</p>
			<p>DRAPPIE, a little drop, a small quantity of drink.</p>
			<p>EFFEIR, what is becoming.</p>
			<p>ENEUGH, enough.</p>
			<p>ETTER-CAP, a spider, an ill-natured person.</p>
			<p>EVITE, avoid, escape.</p>
			<p>EWEST, ewast, contiguous.</p>
			<p>FALLOW, a fellow.</p>
			<p>FAULD, fold.</p>
			<p>FEARED, afraid.</p>
			<p>FECK, a quantity.</p>
			<p>FLEYT, frightened, shy.</p>
			<p>FRAE, from.</p>
			<p>G<abbr class="era">AD</abbr>, a goad, a rod.</p>
			<p>GANE, gone; gang, go.</p>
			<p>GAR, make.</p>
			<p>GATE, way.</p>
			<p>GAUN, going.</p>
			<p>GEAR, goods.</p>
			<p>GHAIST, a ghost.</p>
			<p>GIN, if.</p>
			<p>GITE, crazy, a noodle,</p>
			<p>GLED, a kite.</p>
			<p>GLEG, quick, clever.</p>
			<p>GLISK, a glimpse.</p>
			<p>GOWD, gold.</p>
			<p>GRANING, groaning.</p>
			<p>GRAT, wept.</p>
			<p>GREE, agree.</p>
			<p>GREYBEARD, a stone bottle or jug.</p>
			<p>GRICE, gryce, gris, a pig.</p>
			<p>GRIPPLE, griping, niggardly.</p>
			<p>GUDE, guid, good.</p>
			<p>GULPIN, a simpleton.</p>
			<p>HA’, hall.</p>
			<p>HAG, a portion of copse marked off for cutting.</p>
			<p>HAGGIS, a pudding peculiar to Scotland, containing oatmeal, suet, minced sheep’s liver, heart, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, seasoned with onions, pepper, and salt, the whole mixture boiled in a sheep’s stomach.</p>
			<p>HAIL, whole.</p>
			<p>HECK, a hay rack; at heck and manger, in plenty.</p>
			<p>HET, hot.</p>
			<p>HOG, a young sheep before its first shearing.</p>
			<p>HORSE-COUPER, horse-cowper, a horse-dealer.</p>
			<p>HURDLES, the buttocks.</p>
			<p>HURLEY-HOUSE, a large house fallen into disrepair.</p>
			<p>ILK, same; of that ilk, of the same name or place,</p>
			<p>ILKA, every.</p>
			<p>INGLE, a fire burning upon the hearth.</p>
			<p>IN THE BEES, stupefied.</p>
			<p>KEEPIT, kept.</p>
			<p>KEMPLE, a Scotch measure of straw or hay.</p>
			<p>KEN, know.</p>
			<p>KIPPAGE, disorder, confusion.</p>
			<p>KIRK, church.</p>
			<p>KITTLE, tickle, ticklish.</p>
			<p>LAIRD, lord of the manor.</p>
			<p>LANDLOUPER, a wanderer, a vagabond.</p>
			<p>LEDDY, a lady.</p>
			<p>LIGHTLY, make light of, disparage.</p>
			<p>LIMMER, a hussy, a jade.</p>
			<p>LOON, a worthless fellow, a lout.</p>
			<p>LOUP, leap, start.</p>
			<p>LUG, an ear.</p>
			<p>LUNZIE, the loins, the waist.</p>
			<p>MAE, more.</p>
			<p>MAINS, the chief farm of an estate.</p>
			<p>MAIR, more.</p>
			<p>MAIST, most, almost. MART, beef salted down for winter.</p>
			<p>MASK, mash, infuse.</p>
			<p>MAUN, must.</p>
			<p>MERK, an old silver coin worth 13 ⅓ pence, English.</p>
			<p>MICKLE, large, much.</p>
			<p>MORN, tomorrow.</p>
			<p>MOUSTED, powdered.</p>
			<p>MUCKLE, great, much.</p>
			<p>MUNT, mount.</p>
			<p>MUTCHKIN, a measure equal to about three quarters of an imperial pint.</p>
			<p>NA, nae, no, not.</p>
			<p>NAIGS, horses.</p>
			<p>NAIL, the sixteenth part of a yard.</p>
			<p>NATHELESS, nevertheless.</p>
			<p>NEB, nose, tip.</p>
			<p>NE’ER BE IN ME, devil be in me.</p>
			<p>OLD TO DO, great doings.</p>
			<p>OWER, over.</p>
			<p>PAITRICK, a partridge.</p>
			<p>PANGED, crammed.</p>
			<p>PARRITCH, oatmeal porridge.</p>
			<p>PAUNIE, a peacock.</p>
			<p>PECULIUM, private property.</p>
			<p>PINNERS, a headdress for women.</p>
			<p>PLACK, a copper coin worth one third of a penny.</p>
			<p>PLAIDY, an outer covering for the body.</p>
			<p>PLENISH, furnish.</p>
			<p>PLOY, an entertainment, a pastime.</p>
			<p>POTTINGER, an apothecary.</p>
			<p>POWNIE, a pony.</p>
			<p>POWTERING, poking, stirring.</p>
			<p>PRETTY MAN, a stout, warlike fellow.</p>
			<p>QUEAN, a young woman.</p>
			<p>REDD, part, separate.</p>
			<p>REISES, twigs, branches.</p>
			<p>RESILING, retracting, withdrawing.</p>
			<p>RIGGS, ridges, ploughed ground.</p>
			<p>RINTHEROUT, a roving person, a vagabond.</p>
			<p>ROW, roll.</p>
			<p>ROWED, rolled.</p>
			<p>ROWT, cried out, bellowed,</p>
			<p>ROYNISH, scurvy, coarse.</p>
			<p>SAE, so.</p>
			<p>ST. JOHNSTONE’S TIPPET, a rope or halter for hanging.</p>
			<p>SAIR, sore, very.</p>
			<p>SALL, shall.</p>
			<p>SARK, a shirt.</p>
			<p>SAUMON, a salmon.</p>
			<p>SAUT, salt.</p>
			<p>SCARTED, scratched, scribbled over.</p>
			<p>SCHELLUM, a rascal.</p>
			<p>SCROLL, engross, copy.</p>
			<p>SHANKS, legs.</p>
			<p>SHEERS, shears.</p>
			<p>SHOUTHER, the shoulder.</p>
			<p>SICCAN, sic, such.</p>
			<p>SILLER, money.</p>
			<p>SILLY, weak.</p>
			<p>SKIG, the least quantity of anything.</p>
			<p>SMA’, small.</p>
			<p>SMOKY, suspicious.</p>
			<p>SNECK, cut.</p>
			<p>SORTED, put in proper order, adjusted.</p>
			<p>SOWENS, the seeds of oatmeal soured.</p>
			<p>SPEER, ask, investigate.</p>
			<p>SPENCE, the place where provisions are kept.</p>
			<p>SPRACK, lively.</p>
			<p>SPRECHERY, movables of an unimportant sort.</p>
			<p>SPUILZIE, spoil.</p>
			<p>SPUNG, pick one’s pocket.</p>
			<p>STIEVE, firm.</p>
			<p>STOOR, rough, harsh.</p>
			<p>STRAE, straw.</p>
			<p>STREEKS, stretches, lies.</p>
			<p>SWAIR, swore.</p>
			<p>SYNE, before, now, ago.</p>
			<p>TAIGLIT, harassed, encumbered, loitered.</p>
			<p>TAULD, told.</p>
			<p>THAE, those.</p>
			<p>THIR, these.</p>
			<p>THOLE, bear, suffer.</p>
			<p>THRAW, twist, wrench.</p>
			<p>THREEPIT, maintained obstinately.</p>
			<p>THROSTLE, the thrush.</p>
			<p>TILL, to.</p>
			<p>TIRRIVIES, hasty fits of passion,</p>
			<p>TOCHERLESS, without dowry.</p>
			<p>TOUN, a town, a hamlet, a farm.</p>
			<p>TOY, an old-fashioned cap for women.</p>
			<p>TREWS, trousers.</p>
			<p>TRINDLING, rolling.</p>
			<p>TROW, believe.</p>
			<p>TUILZIE, a quarrel</p>
			<p>TUME, toom, empty.</p>
			<p>TURNSPIT DOGGIE, a kind of dog, long-bodied and short-legged, formerly used in turning a treadmill.</p>
			<p>TYKE, a dog, a rough fellow.</p>
			<p>UMQUHILE, formerly, late.</p>
			<p>UNCO, strange, very,</p>
			<p>UNSONSY, unlucky.</p>
			<p>USQUEBAUGH, whiskey.</p>
			<p>VENY, venue, a bout.</p>
			<p>VIVERS, victuals.</p>
			<p>WA’, wall</p>
			<p>W<abbr class="era">AD</abbr>, would.</p>
			<p>W<abbr class="era">AD</abbr>SET, a deed conveying property to a creditor</p>
			<p>WAIN, a wagon; to remove.</p>
			<p>WALISE, a portmanteau, saddlebags.</p>
			<p>WAN, won.</p>
			<p>WANCHANCY, unlucky.</p>
			<p>WARE, spend.</p>
			<p>WEEL-FARD, weel-faur’d, having a good appearance.</p>
			<p>WEISING, inclining, directing.</p>
			<p>WHA, who.</p>
			<p>WHAR, where,</p>
			<p>WHAT FOR, why.</p>
			<p>WHEEN, a few.</p>
			<p>WHILE SYNE, a while ago.</p>
			<p>WHILES, sometimes.</p>
			<p>WHILK, which.</p>
			<p>WHIN, a few.</p>
			<p>WHINGEING, whining.</p>
			<p>WINNA, will not.</p>
			<p>WISKE, whisk.</p>
			<p>YATE, gate.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
